Getting Started
===============

This guide walks you through installing the KPI Calculator, running your first calculation, and understanding the results.

Installation
------------

Install from PyPI:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install kpi-calculator

Basic Usage
-----------

The simplest way to calculate KPIs is from an ESDL file:

.. code-block:: python

   from kpicalculator import calculate_kpis

   results = calculate_kpis(esdl_file="path/to/model.esdl")
   print(f"Total CAPEX: {results['costs']['capex']['All']} EUR")
   print(f"LCOE: {results['costs']['lcoe']} EUR/MWh")

By default, the analysis uses a 30-year system lifetime with a 5% discount rate. You can override the system lifetime:

.. code-block:: python

   results = calculate_kpis(
       esdl_file="model.esdl",
       system_lifetime=25  # Default: 30 years
   )

Providing Time Series
---------------------

Without time series data, energy values (consumption, production, demand) are returned as zero. There is no rated-capacity fallback — you need to supply actual time series for meaningful energy and emission KPIs.

The package supports three time series sources (DataFrames, InfluxDB profiles, and XML files), but the default API exposes two. InfluxDB is available only when using the adapter layer directly; see the :doc:`../dev_documentation/architecture` documentation for details.

**XML files** — pass a path to an XML time series file:

.. code-block:: python

   results = calculate_kpis(
       esdl_file="model.esdl",
       time_series="timeseries.xml"
   )

**pandas DataFrames** — pass a dictionary of DataFrames keyed by asset ID:

.. warning::

   The DataFrame integration path currently **does not work**. The ``timeseries_dataframes`` parameter is accepted, but the data does not reach the KPI calculators. Internally, DataFrames are stored under plain asset ID keys, but the adapter only maps time series that use composite keys in the format ``asset_id|field_name``. Plain-key entries are detected but discarded because the adapter cannot infer which parameter the data represents. The adapter logs a single warning on the first discarded asset (check your log output for "Found assets with time series data but no parameter information"), but subsequent discards for other assets are silent. This is tracked as a bug to fix. **For now, use XML time series instead.**

The intended API is shown below for reference, but until the bug is resolved, the data will not affect KPI results:

.. code-block:: python

   import pandas as pd

   timeseries_data = {
       "asset_id_1": pd.DataFrame({
           "heat_supplied": [100000, 102000, ...],
       }, index=pd.date_range("2024-01-01", periods=24, freq="h")),
   }

   results = calculate_kpis(
       esdl_file="model.esdl",
       timeseries_dataframes=timeseries_data,
   )

For implementation details on the composite key requirement, see the :doc:`../dev_documentation/architecture` documentation.

From ESDL String Content
------------------------

When the ESDL is already in memory (for example, received from an API or generated by another tool), use ``KpiManager`` directly instead of writing to a file:

.. code-block:: python

   from kpicalculator import KpiManager

   manager = KpiManager()
   manager.load_from_esdl_string(esdl_string)
   results = manager.calculate_all_kpis()

Unit Conversion Data
--------------------

You can supply custom unit conversion factors via a CSV file:

.. code-block:: python

   results = calculate_kpis(
       esdl_file="model.esdl",
       unit_conversion="unit_conversion.csv"
   )

Command Line
------------

The calculator also works from the command line:

.. code-block:: bash

   kpicalculator model.esdl
   kpicalculator model.esdl --time-series data.xml --system-lifetime 25

Exporting Results to ESDL
--------------------------

Export calculated KPIs back into ESDL as ``DistributionKPI`` elements for visualization in the ESDL MapEditor.

**Export to file:**

.. code-block:: python

   from kpicalculator import KpiManager

   manager = KpiManager()
   manager.load_from_esdl("model.esdl", time_series_file="data.xml")
   results = manager.calculate_all_kpis()

   manager.export_to_esdl(results, output_file="model_with_kpis.esdl")

**Get ESDL object (no file):**

.. code-block:: python

   esdl_with_kpis = manager.get_esdl_with_kpis(results)

Export works with both file-loaded and string-loaded ESDL — no temporary files needed for in-memory workflows.

.. _results-structure:

Results Structure
-----------------

``calculate_kpis()`` returns a dictionary with three categories:

.. code-block:: python

   {
       "costs": {
           "capex": {"All": 1000000, "Production": 500000, "Transport": 300000, ...},
           "opex": {"All": 50000, "Production": 30000, ...},
           "npv": 850000,
           "lcoe": 45.5
       },
       "energy": {
           "consumption": 1e10,   # Joules
           "production": 1.1e10,
           "demand": 9.5e9,
           "efficiency": 0.91
       },
       "emissions": {
           "total": 1200,         # tonnes CO2e/year
           "per_mwh": 178         # kg CO2e/MWh
       }
   }

- **Costs**: CAPEX and OPEX are broken down by asset category (Production, Transport, Storage, Conversion, Consumption, and All). NPV is the total lifecycle cost in today's money. LCOE is the average cost per MWh over the system lifetime.
- **Energy**: System-wide totals in Joules. Efficiency is the ratio of consumption to production (0 to 1).
- **Emissions**: Total CO2-equivalent emissions in tonnes and emissions intensity in kg CO2e per MWh of energy consumed.

For a detailed explanation of what each KPI means and how to interpret it, see :doc:`kpi_guide`.

Time Series Behavior
--------------------

The calculator supports three time series sources. The **full** priority order (when all sources are enabled) is:

1. **pandas DataFrames** — passed via ``timeseries_dataframes``
2. **InfluxDB profiles** — referenced in the ESDL as ``InfluxDBProfile`` elements
3. **XML files** — passed via the ``time_series`` parameter

The first source that returns data wins; the rest are not tried. If a source fails with an error, the calculator logs a warning and moves to the next.

However, the default API (``calculate_kpis()``) sets ``use_database_profiles=False`` internally, which **removes InfluxDB from the priority list entirely** — it is not merely skipped, it is excluded. This reduces the effective order to:

1. **pandas DataFrames** (currently broken — see warning above)
2. **XML files**

In practice, only XML files produce working results at this time. If both a DataFrame and an XML file are provided, the DataFrame source is tried first and "succeeds" (no error is raised), but the data is later discarded during asset construction because it lacks composite keys. This means the XML data is also not used in that case, since the DataFrame source already returned. To get working time series, provide XML files **without** also passing ``timeseries_dataframes``.

Without time series from a working source, energy calculators return zero for consumption, production, and demand. There is no rated-capacity fallback (the ``power × 8760`` estimation found in some energy system tools is not implemented here). Providing time series is required for meaningful energy and emission KPIs.

For the full implementation details — including the dynamic priority-building code and how to re-enable InfluxDB — see the :doc:`../dev_documentation/architecture` documentation.
